Okay so we've generated the data and we've plotted a 3D chart.
Now before we run our gradient descent algorithm we're going to have to calculate the slope or the gradient
on all the different points on our chart.
We're going to have that down because remember the gradient was what told us how far away we were from
the minimum the steeper the gradient the further away we were and the higher our cost in our wonderful
three step machine learning process now previously our cost functions were a bit more simple right.
All we had to do was apply our power rule and work out our derivative function.
But for our cost function an example for that's not going to be enough.
And the reason for this is is that this function as a little bit more complex before we only had a slope
in one dimension the x dimension.
But this time we've got a slope in two dimensions because we've got two parameters.
We've got the X and the Y and not only that our functional form is a little bit more complex as well.
We've got a fraction we've got exponents it's getting a little bit more complex to do that derivative
hits.
Not such a simple process.
And this is a little bit of a preparation to the kind of pretty hairy cost functions that you might
encounter.
Going forward a lot of those come from statistical theory and there are definitely a lot more involved.
So what I want to show you in this lesson is how you can tackle quite complex cost functions without
having to work everything out by hand.
So as I said before this time around we've got a Y and we've got to X and we're optimizing our cost
across two parameters just because the Y is low doesn't mean that the cost is low.
Right.
And this makes sense if you think about it looking at this graph just because we've got a low Y doesn't
mean that the X is low as well.
We have to pick both an optimal X and an optimal y.
And this means working out two slopes a slope for each parameter and to calculate the slope we can calculate
the partial derivative.
Now what's a partial derivative.
It's taking at the rivet of of a function with respect to one of the variables and holding the other
one constant.
So if we're taking the partial derivative with respect to x then we're holding y constant.
That way we get the gradient in the x direction and the where we're going to go about this is I'm going
to show you how to calculate a partial derivative using symbolic computation in Python.
So back in our Python notebook at the bottom let's add a couple of cells and then the very first one
we're going to change to markdown and we're gonna add a section heading here.
This section heading is going to read partial derivatives and symbolic computation.
Now the question is what does a partial derivative actually look like and how do you work it out well.
If you remember your high school maths then this isn't gonna be a problem for you.
You're gonna be looking at this function right here and you're already going to be writing out the partial
derivatives for it.
But on the other hand if you're a bit rusty with your calculus or you simply want to check your work.
Let me show you some alternative ways that you can solve this mathematical problem.
The first approach is being a little sneaky and typing the words derivative calculator into google to
find an online derivative calculator that will solve this for you I have to say this is actually a pretty
good idea.
So there's a couple of really good ones out there.
You know you know you'll you'll get a lot of results.
I checked a couple of them out when I quite liked was symbol lab.
So this is a pretty pretty decent one.
So every single one of these Web sites you're gonna get some text box here where you have to enter your
equation.
So ours was one divided by three and then it was to the power of minus X to the power of two minus minus
Y to the power of two.
So you're gonna be typing this in and it's going to be one divided by three to the power of minus X
squared minus Y squared and then you got to make sure on this particular website that you go back down
outside of the exponent and then put plus one here.
Otherwise you'll get a very very different answer than if you have it up top when you hit go it calculates
the derivative for you.
So we've got our solution.
So right here you're looking at the partial derivative with respect to x and the really cool thing about
a lot of these Web sites is that you can actually see the steps on how they got the solution.
So you can see them applying the exponent rule applying the chain rule and then down here.
They're applying our old friend the power rule and they're also showing you how to simplify the solution
in the end now checking out a website like this.
And you know kind of checking the solution or revising your calculus is all very well and good but you
know you and I were doing a Python course together.
So how do you do this in Python and in Jupiter and notebook.
And this is what I'm going to show you right now because we're going to be doing symbolic mathematics
directly in python using a module called Sim pi.
Simple actually has their own Web site as well so you can check out the documentation here if you like.
You can see who's developing it.
You can even donate money to them.
So.
So you know these guys are doing good work it's a good project.
I think the design is a little bit dated needs a bit of a facelift but hey they're doing symbolic mathematics
not designing for Apple or what have you.
Now as always when we want to use an external module in our Jupiter notebook then we're going to have
to import it and we imported at the top where we're importing all the rest of our modules.
So keeping all our imports together nice and tidy.
So from Simplot we're interested in two things.
We're gonna say from simplify all lowercase import symbols comma diff.
So we're interested in importing two things.
One of them is the symbols functionality which will help us write mathematical notation.
And the other is diff which allows us to differentiate a mathematical function.
All right.
So let me scroll back down and show you how simple works.
Also let me fix this typo here.
First off we need to tell Python which mathematical symbols we're gonna use.
So instead of x and y I'm going to use a and b to show the difference between r Python code a bit more
clearly.
So going to say a comma B is equal to symbols
parentheses and then a string single quotes X comma Y.
By writing this line of code or telling Python that a stands for x and B should stand for y in the code
that we're gonna be writing next.
Mm hmm.
Now I realize this sounds a little bit confusing.
So I'm actually going to print out our function as it is below ourself using this notation so I'm gonna
say F of a comma B and it shift into now if you see the arrow symbols is not defined.
Then you've got to hit shift enter on our import so what you should see instead is this.
You should see that Python now recognizes our function as a mathematical function and it's substituted
x and y for our a and b.
Arguments so we can see here that thanks to sim PI a and b are not treated as the x and y in our function
and duper notebook now understands how to work with this function as we would do with a mathematical
equation.
So let's work out the partial derivatives using the def function so many wrap this in a print statement
and a C print and then single quotes.
And in those single quotes I'm gonna say our cost function
f of x y is and then that's gonna be the end of the string comma f of a and b.
So when to put this in a print statement and I'm going to add some more print statements below because
we can now work out the partial derivatives with this def functionality from simply because we've imported
it above it's very very simple to call.
It's def parentheses f of a and b and then you have to provide a second argument to this.
You have to say what you're differentiating with respect to.
So if we wanted to differentiate with respect to our first parameter then we would differentiate with
respect to a hitting shift enter.
We see that this here is the same partial derivative that we got from using one of the online derivative
calculators.
Let me put that in a print statement as well.
So when I say print single quotes comma and then no single quotes some will say partial derivative with
respect to x is and then have the output that we just had here and then close the parentheses at the
end and hit shift enter.
So now we know how to work with our cost function and how to work with our partial derivatives and this
brings us to our next point.
How do we calculate the cost at a particular point in our function for that we need to evaluate our
function.
So we need to substitute the particular x and y values right like 1 and one point five or what have
you into our function.
The simple module gives us this ability through another function namely e Val f evaluate function.
So here's how you would use it on our cost function.
I would have f of a and b dot eval F and then parentheses and in those parentheses I can substitute
the values at which point I want to evaluate the cost.
So I would say subs is equal to and then curly braces a colon.
One point eight comma B colon and then say one point zero.
Then close the curly braces close the parentheses for the evaluation function and then he'd shift into
and what you should see is that the cost at this particular point is approximately zero point nine nine.
If I take a look at our graph I take a look at where x one point eight and y one is it's around here
and going up home at around zero point nine nine on the z axis.
Okay so that's pretty useful.
The only thing that's a little bit new is this notation right here.
This is Python code that we haven't quite seen before because we've got these curly braces.
And then inside we have two values and be separated by a comma and then we set the values with colons.
So a gets the value one point eight and B gets the value one point zero.
So this notation with the curly braces.
Together with the colons is the python notation for giving both a and b a value at the same time
the specific term for this is a Python dictionary.
We've got a key value pair.
A is the key and one point eight is the value.
And then we've got another key value pair B is the key and one point zero is the value.
Now if you're coming from another programming language a dictionary might have been referred to as an
associative array and it's very similar to an array really but instead of kind of grabbing a particular
value by an index by a number as we have done with our array say getting the first one or getting the
second one.
In this case we are working with a key so.
So it's like our index has a name.
And the reason they're called dictionaries is because they pretty much work like real dictionaries.
If you have a word say bug then that's the key.
And if you have the definition of this word an unintended behavior or defect in a program that causes
it to crash or malfunction then that's the value and that's it.
That's the dictionary data structure in a nutshell.
You can always spot it with the Kurdish braces and the Keys separated from the values by a colon.
All right.
So now that I've printed out the cost for our cost function at a particular point when I wrap this in
a print statement again I'm going to say print single quotes comma and in the single quotes I'm going
to write value of F of X Y at x equals one point eight y equals one point zero is and then I'll have
the rest of our print statement like this and I'll finish it all off with a parentheses at the end and
I split it out over two lines like this.
So it's a bit more easy to read.
We had shift enter and evaluate this cell again now has a really really quick practice.
I want to give you a challenge namely can you evaluate the value of the slope with respect to x at this
very very same point at one point eight and one.
And can you print out this value the value of the partial derivative with respect to a at one point
eight and one in the cell.
I'll give you a few seconds to pause the video and and figure this out.
All right.
So here's the solution.
Once again you're going to be working with the evil f functionality but in this case we're not gonna
be evaluating the cost function we're gonna be evaluating the partial derivative so we can say D I f
f diff open parentheses f of a and b comma and then we have to say if we want to evaluate this function
with respect to a or to be going to say a and then when it closed the parentheses for our diff.
So this is our partial derivative.
We'll put a dot after it and then again we'll see if val f parentheses subs equals and now we'll provide
our dictionary open curly braces a colon one point eight comma B colon one point zero and let's print
this out with shift enter and here we can see that the slope at this particular point in the x direction
is zero point zero three seven once again when I wrap this in a print statement and the C value of partial
derivative with respect to x and when I close the parentheses at the end let's shift into.